الحمد بالله رب العالمين
الرحمن الرحيم
مالك يوم الدين
إياك نعبد وإياك نستعيم
اهدن الصراة المستقيم
صراة الذين أنعنت عليهم
غير المغضوب عليهم
السلام عليكم ورحمة الله وبركاته
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
الحمد لله رب العالمين
وبه نستعين ونصلي ونسلم
على أفضل الخلق أجمعين
نبينا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه
والتابعين ومن تبعهم
بإحسان إلى يوم الدين وبعد
We commence by praising Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
sending blessings and salutations
upon Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم
and we ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
to bless him and his entire household
all his companions, may Allah bless them
and may he bless all those
who have struggled and strived from the very beginning
to learn the deen, to put it into practice
to fulfill it, to convey it to others
in a way that today it has got to us
and we ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
to bless every single one of us
and use us also for the same
and to convey the message inshallah
to our offspring and to those around us
in a way that we would be of service
to the deen and of the inshallah
earning the pleasure of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
Ameen
Beloved brothers and sisters, as we had said
in the sixth year of Hijra
the Prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
saw a dream, in his dream
he saw that he was entering
Makkat al-Mukarrama and the Haram area
with his companions
and they were safe and secure
and some of them had shaved heads
and some of them their hair was very short
so this was an instruction
automatically from Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
because the dreams of the messengers
are revelation
so he got up
and he told his companions
I intend to fulfill Umrah
it was not going to be possible
unless Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
had written it
and so what happened is
his people were quite surprised
but they knew that the messenger
صلى الله عليه وسلم
if he instructed then it was to be obeyed
so he started off
by calling the
the Bedouin Arabs
from the outskirts of Madina Munawwara
and as he called them he said
let us go to Makkah
there is a war between us and Quraish
they want to attack us, they want to harm us
at the same time
there is no peace between us
there are so many skirmishes that took place
between the battle of Khandaq
the battle known as the alliance or the trench
and at that particular time
the following year
many skirmishes took place
lots of different platoons
were sent and much
loss was suffered by the mushriks
so how is this going to be
possible the prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم said
look the haram has been
made safe, these people may decide
to abuse
that or to
disrespect the sanctity of the
haram and they may even if
they do decide that we are going to go
without arms, without weapons
and we want to go in large numbers
but sadly the Bedouin Arabs
some of them they did not respond
to Rasulullah صلى الله عليه وسلم
they felt in their hearts that if we
were to all go to Makkah we are not going
to come back and they felt in their
hearts that if these people are going
to go they too are not going to come back
so they made an excuse to Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم
and they delayed
in the meantime the prophet صلى الله عليه وسلم
did not delay the instruction
of Allah سبحانه وتعالى
now let's listen very carefully because this
as much as it may seem
something that was not achieved
by the Muslims ultimately
but if you look at what happened
thereafter this was the beginning
of the victory of the Muslims
this dream was the beginning of the
victory of the Muslims
so the Ansar and the Muhajireen
got together between one thousand
four hundred and one thousand five hundred
men, they got together
and they decided we are going
with Rasulullah صلى الله عليه وسلم
and they began on their path
to Makkah
they had taken with them
the sacrificial animals
at that time the Umrah was
slightly different from what we have
today very slightly in some
of its detailed regulations
and Hajj was not yet
compulsory so what had happened is
the people had left
Al Madinah Al Munawarah
and they had had their Ihram
and at the same time they had taken their
sacrificial animals and they had
progressed now sacrificial animals
from the pagan days
they had high value in the eyes
of the people if anyone saw a sacrificial
animal it normally had a sign
they would put a sign on it this is not
to eat and so on this is for a sacrifice
in the Haram people would not really steal
that because it was considered
highly taboo and it would bring
about very very bad luck
on the person in fact the wrath
of the Almighty so they
had progressed and as they proceeded
Quraish knew exactly
what these people had intended
they knew very well that the
Muslims are coming one thousand four
hundred to one thousand five hundred men
and they are unarmed
they only have a few swords in order
to protect themselves from some perhaps
attack on the road and so on
but they do not intend to harm they want to
come into Makkah they want to make Umrah
and they want to go back to Al Madinah
Al Munawarah without any violence
nothing besides an act of worship
for the pleasure of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
so what had happened as they
had gone when they got to a place
known as Usfan
when they got to a place known as
Usfan between Madinah and Makkah
the messenger had come
back to Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam whom
Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam had
sent to find out what was happening
in Quraish what are their views
so when this messenger got back
he told the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa
sallam Quraish has decided they are
not allowing you they are going to block
you they are going to stop you no matter what
because they feel it is against
their pride and dignity
to allow the enemy to come into the
city even if it means to engage
in an act of worship and yet Quraish
in the past used to allow their
enemies to come to Makkah because
they had certain months in which
they would not fight just to
allow for those who were who wanted
to fulfill their Umrah and their Hajj to come
in obviously at that time they
used to worship idols and
so on the Muslims had intended
not for the sake of idols but for the
pleasure of Allah the instruction of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala and so
the Quraish this
man says they have sent Khalid
ibn al-Waleed with an army
of men approximately 100
200 men there was a number of men
that had left with Khalid ibn al-Waleed
some narrations make mention
of 200 men they were heavily armed
and they were coming to charge at the
Muslims now this is something very bad
because the Muslims did not intend any
harm they wanted to go
engage in an act of worship and return
so when the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
heard that Khalid ibn al-Waleed
has left with
at that time he was amongst the Mushrik
he had left with this little group of
people in order to attack the Prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam changed his path
and he decided to arrive in
Makkah from not
from the normal path but
via a place known as Hudaibiyah
it was called
Hudaibiyah because there was a well
there known as Hudaibiyah
so people might ask why is it called Hudaibiyah
because of the well
so when the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
got to this place known as Hudaibiyah
he camped there
and when he camped there
the Kuffar of Makkah were very uneasy
because here you have
Khalid ibn al-Waleed returning to Makkah
telling the people of Makkah
that really I did not even meet
these people on the path they were too
sharp and they had used a different
road they had used a different route
you know later on Khalid ibn al-Waleed
radiallahu anhu he says whenever
I fought the Muslims and whenever
I engaged in anything against the Muslims
I knew that Muhammad sallallahu alaihi
wasallam was a protected man
the man
completely protected it's
impossible for me to harm him or attack
him this is a warrior of war
telling you later on that this is the
messenger and his status as Allah
says Allah is the one who protects
Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
so when the path was
changed Khalid ibn al-Waleed came back
when he came back they had
camped the Muslims that camped in Hudaibiyah
the Kuffar of Quraysh decided
to send them a man
officially to say do you know what
go and find out officially why are these people
here they knew but they wanted it
official so they sent Budeil
ibn Warqa al-Khuzaa
one of the leaders of Khuzaa
this was also the plan of Allah
the plan of Allah why
they sent a man who was one of the leaders
of Khuzaa later on this man
realized who was right and who was wrong
and you will see what happened to Khuzaa
so this
Budeil ibn Warqa al-Khuzaa
he came to the Prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam and says I am a messenger from
Quraysh in an official capacity
I want to know why are you here
now he is watching the Muslims
he is seeing them in Ihram
he is seeing them with Talbiya
Talbiya means labbayk Allahumma labbayk
we are at your service we have
responded your call oh Allah it was a call
of Allah the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
was instructed in his dream and so
they were responding to the call of Allah
labbayk wa sa'dayk labbayk means
we are at your service oh Allah
we have responded your call oh Allah
Allah calls and we respond
so he heard this
he was touched by it and he was told
we are only here
in order to engage in Umrah
and we will go back that's it we don't want
anything extra and we will not accept
anything less so Budeil
he understood it he went to Quraysh
and told them these people they don't
have weaponry these people are not
intending harm they are calm
they are relaxed they have come with their leader
in large numbers one thousand odd
meaning one thousand four hundred to five hundred
and they
do not intend harm perhaps we should just
let them in Quraysh said you don't
know just sit down you don't know anything
we are going to send someone else
we are going to send
someone else this was also a plan of Allah
so the next person they
sent was Al-Hulais ibn Alqama
he was from
Al-Ahabish
these are the people
who were made up of different groups
around Makkah Al-Mukarrama
who did not perhaps belong to one
particular clan they were known as
Ahbash because they were the ones
who fell under a specific
leader and they had pledged allegiance
with the people of Quraysh and they were
together with them and what
had happened is when the Prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam sent Al-Hulais
he was from the people
who really looked at the
animals of sacrifice very
highly they were scared of animals
of sacrifice because they knew these
are for Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala even
though they were mushriks they knew we
were not supposed to harm these so
when he was coming the Prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam told his companions bring
forth all your animals and let him see
all of these animals and say your
talbiya aloud
so
they are
uttering and the animals are
there and this Al-Hulais comes through
and he looks at the Prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam and he sees
all this he asks them the same question
he is responded with a similar answer
he goes back to Quraysh he says look
these people have their animals perhaps
you should allow them they are not
harmful they are not going to harm anyone
they want to come just to engage in worship
you people are custodians of this
place Quraysh was custodian of
Zamzam they were in charge in
Makkah of even the Kaaba at that
particular time so how could they say
we're not allowing somebody to come
here so now what happened is
Quraysh then decided no no
no this is wrong you cannot
do this and we are not going to accept
what you are saying how can you come and tell us
we only told you to find out now you're
coming to instruct us what is it that
needs to be done and so on and therefore
after a while what happened
they sent another man
Urwah ibn Mas'ud al-Thaqafi
this was also a blessing from Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala one of the leaders
of Thaqeef Thaqeef were the
people of Ta'if remember what they did to
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam so
this man Urwah ibn Mas'ud al-Thaqafi
he went
and he spoke to Muhammad
sallallahu alaihi wasallam he saw the people
he saw everything
he saw the Talbiya he saw the animals
he also came back do you know what
he said he said oh Quraysh
now this was a leader of Thaqeef he was a
senior politician he says
oh Thaqeef I have been to
Kisra and I have been to
Kisra in Persia and Qaisar
of the Roman Empire
and I have seen how their
people operate with them
how they treat each other
this man there is a
totally different relation between him
and those who follow him
they would give their lives for him
and this man he has disciplined
them to the degree that they look down
when they are talking and they don't speak
loudly they have so much respect
they are the most well cultured
people anyone who adopts
Islam properly becomes a person
whose morals are of the highest
standards that's because that's Islam
Subhanallah
so Quraysh was shocked they heard this
obviously they knew it they did not like it
they rejected the statement and
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala wanted this to
happen because
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala wanted
these leaders who had come
who were not directly the leaders
of Quraysh but people whom Quraysh
used in order to go to speak to
the Muslims Allah wanted them to see
who was right and who was wrong Quraysh just
denied it I want to pause
for a moment I studied in Madinah
Munawwara and I tell you we had
a ruling and it's still there
you know you're not allowed to make Hajj
unless five
years have lapsed this was for
a long time for those who live there
and you need a special permit
I'm mentioning this because it's connected to what I
said just now and so
we as students used to like to go for Hajj
and we sometimes you know
you have a pass and for five years
you don't get a pass there after
so some of the students who are adamant
on going they say look the last day
let's just all go what we
do the whole busload will not have
any permit we'll all be in Ihram
and as we passing the check point all these
people are Muslims we will loudly just
say labbayk Allah
humma labbayk and continue
saying that let's see what happens believe
me 100 percent of
the time it worked
they look at you they don't ask you
for anything they just let you carry on why because
hey how are they going to stop
someone who's already in Ihram and
screaming labbayk Allah humma labbayk
and not just one a whole army of them
Subhanallah may Allah open our
doors so this is the softening of the
heart by the Talbiya and the
softening of the heart by looking at people in
Ihram and
imagine at the moment
things are different but here we're giving
you the example even the
flash of the time they
also had that in them that if they
see the animals they wouldn't stop anyone
Quraish stopped them Quraish said no
you're not going may Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala open our doors and grant us
goodness thereafter Muhammad
salallahu alayhi wa salam decided that no
I need to send someone to talk to
them so he appointed
Uthman ibn Affan radiallahu an
and he said Uthman
ibn Affan will go he will speak
to them upon the guarantee of
a man known as Abaan ibn
Al-Sa'id Al-Amawi this was a man who had
given a guarantee of the safety of
Uthman at that time we've already explained
how this guarantee worked
so Uthman ibn Affan
ten people joined him
they were from amongst those who
some of them wanted to meet their relatives and some of
them wanted to go and see this one and that one
the Prophet salallahu alayhi wa salam instructed
Uthman to do two things one was to go
to Quraish and inform them why we are here
secondly to go to the weak
Muslims who were stopped from making
Hijra and tell them a
good news for you
Insha'Allah very soon there will
be victory based on what
the dream that Muhammad salallahu alayhi wa salam had
so just bear a bit of
patience it's not so long now
Insha'Allah we will be victorious
so Uthman ibn Affan radiallahu
anhu and the
others they had
gone through into Makkah
and they met Quraish
he met Quraish
and he spoke to the leaders
and he told them this is why we are here
they told him you are
never ever going to enter
this place whilst we are here
in this particular manner no ways
you will not enter this
meaning this place you can tell
the group of people to leave
and you can all go away we have no
discussion we don't want to entertain anything
in the meantime they hatched
the plan what did they do?
they sent a man known as Mikraz ibn
Hafs with about fifty to seventy
men depending on some of the narrations
and he had gone back knowing these
people are unarmed and he had intended
to harm them but Rasulullah
salallahu alayhi wa salam had had a man
known as Muhammad ibn Maslamah radiallahu
anhu who was guarding the group
and when he saw
this man Mikraz coming
through trying to
attack they had surrounded
them and brought them captive
besides Mikraz he fled but the others
were held captive for a while
in the meantime
in Makkah al-Mukarrama the leaders
of Quraysh told Uthman ibn Afan
you can do your own
tawaf here and then you can go back
as for the others nobody is coming here
he said how can I make
tawaf here when the messenger
salallahu alayhi wa salam is being
blocked I'm going to go back so they
stopped him even from going back
they held him for a while
when they held him for a while
news got to the Muslims
who were not very far they were in Hudabiyah
which is just outside Makkah
news got to them that Uthman
ibn Afan radiallahu anhu has been
murdered by Quraysh this was a
rumour however it was
a rumour that had its effects
what happened
subhanallah when the prophet salallahu
alayhi wa salam heard this he was deeply
saddened and at the same time he was
now preparing his people
to go and revenge and retaliate
the death of one of his men
this was always the case if you
look at the battles that took place a lot of
the battles had taken place
because of one person being
executed or one person being
harmed and so on look at what
happened to Banu Qaynuqa we spoke about
them if you take a look at the
chief of Ghassan what they did to
one of the messengers of
Muhammad salallahu alayhi wa salam who was sent
with a letter when they killed him
later on the prophet salallahu alayhi
wa salam went to Mu'tah in order
to tackle those people we will come
to that war inshallah later on
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us goodness
so here one man was
killed according to rumour
and these people did not have
weapons so they were sitting
under the tree the prophet salallahu alayhi wa salam got up
and spoke to them very powerful speech
and told them we will pledge
we will pledge to die
if we have to but we are going to
revenge and retaliate we are fighting
these people
how many are we how many are they
where are we where are
them who has the weapons
and who doesn't have the weapons
but against all odds
subhanallah
the Muslims pledged allegiance
with Muhammad
salallahu alayhi wa salam that we
will die if it need
if it need be but we will
revenge and retaliate for the death of this
one man subhanallah
we will die if the
need be but we are going to retaliate
and we are going to revenge
Quraish
news got to Quraish of this
they began shaking as powerful as
they were they began shaking why
they loved life
they were clinging to dear life
and the Muslims
to them it was a win-win situation
either they are victorious here
or they are martyred and they are victorious in the
akhirah they don't lose anything
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us
a deep understanding and then
subhanallah
as this had happened
Quraish decided to send a
man
and his name was Suhail ibn Amr
this man was sent by
Quraish go and talk to them
let's strike a deal
let's sign a treaty
we don't want to fight
because this was haram we weren't supposed
to fight in the haram you're not
allowed to fight and kill no
murdering nothing allowed there but
if someone kills you there you're
allowed to retaliate there no harm
the Quran speaks about it as well
if they kill you within the haram
you're allowed to retaliate as well within the
haram may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
so when they send Suhail ibn Amr
this man came and he spoke to
Muhammad sallallahu alayhi wa sallam and he
said okay what is it that you want
we want to make umrah
no we're not going to allow you to make umrah well
we need to now fight
but Uthman ibn Affan
what happened is
he had then been brought and
when they saw that he was actually
alive and he was okay
they were at ease but this had
resulted in this agreement
being drawn up had it
not been for the rumor the
Muslims would not have pledged under
the tree that tree became known
later on as
the tree
even Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala speaks
about it in the Quran we will get to those
verses a little bit later
so when they pledged under the tree it
was a result of a rumor because of that
Quraish began to tremble because
of that they decided to sign a treaty
had it not been one after the other
for all these things to have happened the treaty
was not going to come had they not left
Madinatul Munawwara to come to Makkah
where were they going to sign a treaty so this was
all the plan of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
this is why obey the
instruction of Allah you will see
the benefit even if you see a little bit
of for example difficulty
in the path of it you know you might want
to get up for Salah you feel lazy and so on
but if you are to get up you will
find great benefit Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
will open your doors in a huge
way may Allah open our doors
so they began to sign
Ali ibn Abi Talib radiAllahu anhu was
one of the writers and there were a few scribes
there were witnesses from either side from the side
of the kuffar two main witnesses
who were they this man Suhail
ibn Amr and the other one who was
Mikraz ibn Hafs whose people were
released they were surrounded they were actually
for a while they were more or less
taken captive but the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
said release them we have not come here
to fight at all and another thing is
we are now about
to sign this treaty with these people release
them we don't want to have any form
of captives and so on to
give them reason to attack us and so on
so the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
first point the Muslims wrote
bismillahirrahmanirrahim
that was the first point they wrote this
is an agreement
between Muhammad Rasul
Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and Suhail ibn Amr
meaning Quraish represented
by Suhail ibn Amr
this man Suhail ibn Amr says hang on
you need to remove that
if you are saying bismillahirrahmanirrahim
we don't believe
in Allah alrahman alrahim
so remove that take it out we don't
want it there and another thing is
you are saying Muhammad Rasul
Allah sallallahu alaihi wasallam we don't
believe that you are Rasul Allah had we believed
you were Rasul Allah the story the matter
would have been over so Muhammad sallallahu
alaihi wasallam tells Ali ibn Abi Talib
radhiallahu anhu delete this take it out
this Rasulullah
delete it so Ali
radhiallahu anhu says according to some narrations he
says how can I delete this
I can't with my hands I must
remove this no I can't now
Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam when he saw
that his companions were not prepared
to delete Rasulullah
sallallahu alaihi wasallam from that particular
little sheet that they were writing on
or whatever it was they were actually writing
this agreement on he
told Ali ibn Abi Talib radhiallahu
anhu show me where it is I will
delete it why did he
say show me where it is
because he was unlettered
the word we use is not illiterate
illiterate is actually a derogatory term
unlettered means he only
could not recognize the letters that's what it
means he couldn't recognize letters read
or write that's all but he was the most
highly educated from amongst
not only mankind at large but the creatures
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
that was Muhammad ibn Abdullah so
we need to distinguish between illiterate
and unlettered here unlettered
when he was shown it's between here
and here he rubbed it off
sallallahu alaihi wasallam
so what was the remainder of the agreement
you will go
back without Umrah this year
you go back to Medina and you will come
back next year and we will leave Makkah
for three days and you will enter Makkah
for three days without any weaponry besides
the little sword or perhaps something you may need
in order to protect yourself from perhaps
a stray animal and so on you will come
to Makkah we give you three days and then
you will go back that was in the agreement
another point in the agreement
whoever comes will be safe from
you into Makkah and whoever goes from
here in that on that path
of Medina Munawwara shall be safe
they wanted safety security for their
people and for their caravans and so
on another thing for ten
years we're not going to fight
we will be at peace we're
signing a ceasefire basically
that was a point for how many years
ten whole years no more fighting
not at all and then what happens
they said something which was
highly unfair but the Muslims agree
they said if anyone
from amongst us the people of
Makkah have to come to Medina you send them back
but if anyone from you come to
us we're not going to send them back
look at this not fair at all the Prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam said no problem put it have it
there write it as a point if this is what they want
we will give it to them because obviously who
is going to come from Medina to Makkah
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us
goodness but it was a difficult
point for the Sahabah radiallahu anhu to understand
they were worried about certain
people like Abu Jandal and the others
who were in Makkah who were suffering and
at the same time they were prevented
from engaging or from undertaking the Hijra
and the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
now is signing a treaty to say
that they won't be able to come to Medina
Munawwara
then they were told
you may come back the following here
and at the same time there was
one of the clauses saying
nobody break this agreement
not at all nobody break the
agreement the war we are not
going to fight with one another we are not going to
assist anyone against one another
and at the same time any
little clan that wants to join in
with Poraysh they may seek
alliance with them and anyone who would like
to join with the Muslim forces
they may join them as well and this was
signed I've just made mention of some of the points
there and it was agreed upon
as they had agreed upon this
you find Abu Jandal he was a man
ardi allahu anhu who was from amongst
the Muslims who was chained in
Makkah he had come with
a few of his shackles or
some of those chains that were on
him at the time when they had
just struck this agreement and
he says oh messenger sallallahu alaihi wasallam
I have come to join you I want to come
to Madina Munawwara this is a test
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam says
oh Abu Jandal go back
bear patience inshallah very soon
they will be victory very soon they will be
victory and then
what happened is
Khuzaa the clan
of the man who had come in
to talk to Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi
wasallam this same Khuzaa
they decided we want to
align ourselves with the
Muslims so they struck a
deal with the Muslims to say now we will
be with you under the protection
of the Muslimin with specific
rules and regulations and some agreement
that they had drawn up
but Khuzaa joined the forces
of the Muslimin and at the same time
Banu Bakr joined with
the kuffar of Quraysh so
this agreement started working
it started bearing fruits already
and thereafter the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam got up and he
instructed his companions his companions
were
in a very difficult position because
they had all come enthusiastically
going all the way to Mecca
imagine the journey we've made mention
of it it used to take them between
8 and 16 days
to go to Al-Makkah Al-Mukarrama
8 to 16
days today it doesn't
even take us 8 hours to get there
but at that time imagine now
they are being told Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wasallam is telling
them we have to go back
shave your heads
and sacrifice your animals
and let's leave
they were sitting watching
they couldn't believe what was
just said in the sense that they knew
it's from the messenger but perhaps they were thinking
maybe a verse might be revealed
something might happen because he saw a dream
sallallahu alaihi wasallam
that he is going into Mecca
so perhaps we will still be going into Mecca
so as they were waiting
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam entered his
little tent
that was put up there for him Um Musalama
radiallahu anha was there
and he looks at her and he says Um Musalama
look at my people I've just
instructed them to do something they're taking a
bit long that's not like the
Sahaba we know the Sahaba radiallahu anhum
as soon as something was instructed immediately
they did it
so Um Musalama says oh messenger
sallallahu alaihi wasallam perhaps it is heavy
in the sense that you know
they have come with their animals they have been ready
they are waiting to go in they were so enthusiastic
now that this is an instruction
the best way forward is if you
come out and you
get your hair shaved
or you slaughter your animal and get your hair shaved
then they will all follow
so the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam loved
this opinion of Um Musalama
and said yes that is correct
he emerged and then
he had
engaged in sacrificing his
animal and he called the barber to
shave his head off and immediately
the Sahaba radiallahu anhum got up
without even one word and they all
followed suit may Allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala grant us protection may
he make us from those also who can follow
the example of Rasulullah
sallallahu alaihi wasallam as they
were completed doing this
they then began to proceed towards
Al Madinatul Munawwara a few
things happened this was a very blessed
journey the return to Madina
Munawwara the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
says a surah has been
revealed to me
that is the best
the best surah or should I
say in fact the exact
wording of it the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
says tonight a surah
has been revealed to me
that is better
than anything that the sun has
ever risen upon subhanallah
which means this is the best
news I've ever had
what was the news the Muslims
were more or less according to
what someone who is just
looking at what had happened is
they more or less suffered
a defeat because they went with an intention
they had to swallow that
and come back and yet
verses were revealed the whole of
Surah Al Fath Al Fath means
the victory surah of the victory
is revealed when they were not
allowed to go into Makkah
إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحَمُّ بِينَ
indeed we have granted you
a clear victory
so some of the companions are saying
أَفَتْحُنْهُ
is this really a victory
the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam says
بَلَا indeed it is a victory
and it is a victory that Allah has granted us
some of the companions asked a question
as per the narration in Sahih al-Bukhari
that what is there in it
for us oh messenger because obviously
the kuffar of Quraish they achieved a lot
they actually got us out there
and what is there for us in it
so Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed the verses
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
revealed the verses saying
ليُدْخِلَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ
جَنَّاتِ
in order that the
believing males and females
Allah may grant them entry into
paradise that is what is there for you
so this is a victory
what type of a victory you will achieve paradise
Alhamdulillah
is there any victory greater
than achievement of paradise
the answer is no
this dunya we are not going to get what we want
in the dunya nobody has been promised
that they will get what they want in the dunya
what happens is
in this dunya we are tested
some have certain things
some have very few things some have a little bit more
some have a little bit less
but the ultimate goodness is
paradise so they were told you will be
achieving paradise they were very
very happy at that and Alhamdulillah
the Muslims began to proceed
as they proceeded something else
happened
a lady by the name of Um Kulthum
Binti Uqbah Ibn
Abu Muait she was one of those
who was stuck in Makkah she came
and she was taking
or she was undertaking the Hijra to
Madinah Munawwarah and
now there was an agreement to
say we will send them back
if you look carefully at the agreement
it was worded in masculine
not in feminine
that's one point that some of the
ulama have drawn
and if you look at the verse of the Quran
even if it was not
worded in that particular way
the Quran says when a Muslim
female comes
you test her with a few
questions if she passed
the test and you know that she
is only engaging in the Hijra
for the sake of Allah not
in order to achieve something material
and not in order to come to relatives
and so on but solely for the
pleasure of Allah it is forbidden
to send her back to the
Mushriks and the Kuffar not at all
and what you do if she is a married
woman who is married to a Mushrik
and she has come as
a Mu'minah as a believing female
to Al Madinah Munawwarah you
test her if she passed the test
you do not let her go back
but at the same time whatever
the person whom she was married
to has spent upon her
you must reimburse the
entire amount and then
she will be considered as divorced from
that particular man and after the
idda she can get married to whomever she wishes
this is an instruction of the Quran
if you read Surah Al-Fatih
you will find it even Surah Al-Mumtahina
various other Surahs of the Quran have made
mention of so many rules and regulations
there is a verse where Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
says
O you who believe
when the female Muhajirat
come to you test them
what was the test a few questions to
confirm that they are doing it for the pleasure of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala if that is
the case the Quran continues to say
don't send them back
to the disbelievers
don't send them back to the disbelievers
so this was the exception
now another man
known as Abu Basir or Abu
Busair Utbah Ibn Usaid
Al-Thaqafi he was from
Taqeef he was also a Muslim who
had accepted Islam he ran
he ran away
he managed to get out of Makkah
Al-Mukarrama and he came to Rasulullah
sallallahu alayhi wasallam to
Madina Munawwara Quraysh sent
two men to get this man
when Quraysh sent two men to get this man
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam looked at
him and said you have to go back we have an
agreement between us and Quraysh you've
got to go back bear patience and inshallah
we will be having victory
very soon Allah will open
the doors very soon
so this man Utbah
Ibn Usaid known as Abu Basir
he was
very hurt in the sense that he didn't want
to go back so he went in
the company of these two men when they got to
Dhul-Ulayfah he attacked them
and one of them was executed
because he didn't want to go back and he didn't
want to be harmed he knew if I go back they're going to
punish me penalize me perhaps execute
me one of them was executed
and the other one ran away so this
Abu Basir comes back to Madina Munawwara
the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wasallam told
him look what is it
he said this is what happened he said no
I cannot accept you in Madina you can
go anywhere else but not in Madina
and this resulted
in something great something very
big they went on to the
path of Sham
the region not too far from
Madina Munawwara but on the road towards
Sham and what happened
they stayed there
and he invited
others who were in a similar
position like him such
as Abu Jandal according to some narrations
Abu Jandal joined him so
they were not in Madina they were now in a third
place so Quraysh cannot say we need the man
because we don't have the man
and he's gone so they were
now based and stationed in a certain place
and they used to way lay
the caravans of Quraysh as they
came these people would
enter and they would attack and so
on so Quraysh became so fed
up that in no time
they sent to Rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wasallam
a messenger saying one clause
of this agreement we had struck
we want to delete it what is the
clause the clause that if anyone from
us comes to you you must send them
back don't send them back you rather keep
them because now they realize
these people are going to a third place
they're causing harm to us
because ardullahi wasi'ah the land of
Allah is so broad if you're not
going to be here or there you can be in a third
place subhanallah may Allah open
our doors and grant us understanding so
look at the victory of the Muslims
it already started they deleted
one and at the same time
subhanallah
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed
a beautiful surah exposing
those a'rab that we spoke about
at the beginning of this session
those Bedouin Arabs who had
delayed to come because they thought
the Muslims are not going to return
so Allah says
when
you go back those same people who
had delayed to respond they will come
to you and say no no no we wanted to join
you but we were busy with our family
and our wealth and we had other
occupation we were engaged in so please
seek forgiveness for us Allah says they
are telling you with their tongues what
is not in their hearts Allah says
you thought that the
Rasul sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
and the believers were never going
to return back to their homes that is
why you didn't join them they were exposed
so Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala then
revealed several verses explaining how
to treat these people and how to tell
them that the next time we go out you'd better
join us if you don't join us then
we will consider you x y and z may
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us protection
and may he make us from those who
understand
uh now
there was something that
happened as a result of this
agreement
the kuffar for the first time
witnessed how Muslims
were living because now there was
peace no one was worried as
you know Banu Qurayza gone
Banu An-Nadheer went before them Banu
Qaynuqa gone before them so that
problem is solved temporarily because
Banu An-Nadheer still had to be
sorted out they had gone some of
them to Khaybar and from there
they were the ones responsible
for making the alliance that resulted
in the battle of the trench
so the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
had already planned we're going to go for them
but in the meantime there's peace
between the Arabs and
what this resulted in so many
of them witnessing how beautiful
the lives of the Muslims are
the rules of cleanliness
the rules and of the morals
and so on the respect the
etiquettes the social conduct the belief
in Allah alone no idols and
so on so it started becoming
a da'wah
on its own a call to
Islam just by watching today
you know people feel shy
they say I need to read my
salah but this is an airport you know what should I do now
okay if there's no salah facility what
can you do wallahi you don't have
an option but to choose a corner
where you have to lay down your musalla
and you have to read your salah there's no option
and if you're thinking for a moment
that I'm shy of the people who are passing
wallahi let me tell you
the bulk of them will probably learn
much more than they ever have
just by watching you and they will have
it in their hearts some good form
of a feeling within their hearts
there will be just a few who might look
at us and think that what are these people doing
the rest of them know very well
that this is a deen that cannot
be competed with so that
is why do not feel for
a moment embarrassed about
your own faith sometimes we as
muslim and I know it happens to some of the youngsters
you know you're going somewhere
and you're wearing head
gear for example suddenly it goes out it's in
the pocket why hey you know what brother
don't worry your identification
people need to know you're a good man
you have pure islamic
identification and at the same time
you have character and conduct
that far outweighs anything
they can come with allahu akbar
why should we pretend not to be muslim
why pretend become hypocritical
don't be shy
your name is muhammad stop saying mo
no say muhammad no no
problem if it is abdul aziz stop
saying duli allah protect us
allah protect us wallahi
this is what's happening why are we shy of our
identity we need to engage in
salah we need to remember
say my name is abdul aziz i'm muslim
so what allahu akbar may allahu
subhanahu wa ta'ala open our doors this is
how some of them accepted islam
just by watching and just by looking
the only thing is
there was no hijra allowed
at that particular time which means
the hijra of the muslims the door
was opened up to the day of fatah
but at that particular time before
this little part of the treaty was
actually deleted
they were unable to come to
madina munawwara once it was deleted
alhamdulillah that problem was solved
people started coming
to al-madina al-munawwara
and thereafter you find in this particular
surah and as i always say
let us take a moment to pick
the quran up and read the
meanings of these verses
if you pick up
surat al-fatah
of the victory and you read
the verses now that you know the story
wallahi you will weep
when you see what had happened let me give you
a few verses of the quran
allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says
...
when they were leaving
they thought to themselves now you see the dream
happened and we are not really
from amongst those who were fortunate enough
to go in and so on verses were
revealed allah will definitely
make true the dream of the messenger
that he had seen and insha allah
you will definitely enter the
haram safe and sound
some of you shaving their hair and others
with their hair trimmed quite short and so on
so this was a verse allah
is promising them don't worry
it is coming subhanallah so this
resulted in them strengthening their
iman masha allah they became
happy another verse
powerful verse
...
allah has indeed
become pleased with those
who pledged the allegiance under
the tree allah has become
pleased with them
and allah looked at their hearts
allah has seen the condition of their
hearts allah is pleased with them
and is giving them good news
of victory to come
very very soon subhanallah
imagine one thousand
four hundred to one thousand
five hundred people being
told allah is pleased with you
the verse is revealed imagine
those people they are known as
...
the prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam used to say
regarding certain people
that this person how can you speak about him
he was with us in badr and he was with us
in hudaibiyah why badr because we
heard the hadith ...
...
allah has looked at the hearts of the people
who took part in the battle of badr and he
said do as you please for indeed
i have forgiven you and
hudaibiyah here it is allah says i am pleased
with you subhanallah
so this was a gift of allah
and allah subhanahu wa ta'ala told them
you are going to be victorious very very
soon subhanallah may allah subhanahu
wa ta'ala grant us goodness as i said
it's very important for us to
pick up the pages of the quran the quran
and read what it says
understand it it's beautiful
it is moving it will move
us and strengthen our iman these
are the words of allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
... the surah of the victory
may allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us
the opportunity to read it and understand it
and draw lessons from it and put into practice
now when the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
got to madina munawwara there was
a lot of peace as we said mashaallah
they could concentrate on something else
spreading islam further
than where it had got to
by that particular time so the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam decided right let's
bring our scribes let's write letters
we want to write letters to all the leaders
of the world that we have access to
that time there were no aircraft and so on
they had horsemen who would go people
on camel or horse who would travel
so the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
first things first he
sent message to heraclius
who was heraclius the
Byzantine empire under the roman empire
this man heraclius was one of their
leaders and the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam sent to him
...
why do i say that
do you know that gibrail aleyhi
salatu wasalam
sometimes appeared in the
form of this man sup'hanAllah
i can give you one quick narration
it's little bit off but meaning
off our topic but i need to stop
because wallahi it is softening
of the heart one day a man
came, no one knew him
from the sahaba and he was dressed with white
clothing, he was very good
looking and at the same time
His hair was black, he had black hair.
And he was not looking as though he had undertaken a journey,
which means, where did he come from?
No one knows him.
And yet, it seems like he did not undertake any journey.
He came and he sat in front of Rasulullah ﷺ
just like we would sit when we sit in qa'dah of salah.
And he put his knees next to the knees of Rasulullah ﷺ
and he's asking him questions.
What is Islam?
The Prophet ﷺ says Islam
and he mentions the five pillars.
So this man says, you are right.
So the Sahaba say, this man is asking a question
and when the answer comes, he says, you are right.
Come on, imagine someone's asking you, how old are you?
You say, I'm 45.
He says, yes, you're right.
Well, then why did you ask me if you knew?
Allahu akbar.
Subhanallah.
So he asked another question, mal-iman, what is iman?
The Prophet ﷺ mentioned the pillars of iman.
He says, you're right.
Sahaba say, we were surprised again.
Then he says, mal-ihsan.
The Prophet ﷺ answered the question again.
What is ihsan?
Then he asked, when is the hour?
The Prophet ﷺ responds with the historic response,
mal-masoolu anha bi-a'lamamina assain.
The one who is being asked
does not know any more about this question
than the one who is asking.
What a powerful way of answering.
Subhanallah.
And then what happens?
He asked, okay, so what are the signs of this hour?
So the Prophet ﷺ says a few of the signs and so on.
Then he gets up after he says, you're right,
and he walks away.
When he walks away,
the Prophet ﷺ says, do you know who this was?
They say Allah and His Messenger know best.
He says, hadha jibreel ataakum yuallimukum amradinikum.
This was Jibreel.
He came to teach you your religion
with a Q&A, basically.
He was asking and the response.
Then he was saying, okay, he asked another question.
So when he was asking,
the people around were all learning something.
Subhanallah.
May Allah open our doors.
That was Jibreel.
So we say,
Dihya ibn Khalifa al-Kalbi.
The reason why we diverted is
because Jibreel alayhi salam sometimes came in his form.
And this man was sent to Heraclius.
When he got to Heraclius,
I'm going to mention this in detail today.
And tomorrow, inshallah,
we'll see the rest of the letters
that Rasulullah ﷺ sent.
And we'll probably go into the Battle of Khaybar as well
and what happened.
This Heraclius,
something very amazing happened.
Obviously, under the Roman Empire,
the messenger Dihya r.a comes to him with this letter.
What did the letter say?
Simple, straightforward, to the point.
Bismillah ar-Rahman ar-Rahim.
This is from Muhammad to Rasulullah ﷺ
to Heraclius.
And it says there,
Aslim taslam yu'atika allahu ajraka marrataini
fa inta wallayka fa alayka ithma al-arisiyeen.
A letter, very straightforward to the point.
Accept the message and you will be saved.
And the message obviously,
Dihya al-Kalbi r.a was there.
He knew what the message was.
And at the same time, the letter had in it,
if you do not accept the message
and if you do not accept this deal,
then you will bear the sin of all your subjects.
This man looked at the letter and something struck.
So he says, is there anyone in our area here
who has come from that land
whom perhaps we could talk to?
So the people said, yes,
there is a group of Quraishis,
of Quraish who have come to do business.
They used to come to Al-Sham anyway to do business.
So they have come from amongst them.
There was Abu Sufyan.
So Abu Sufyan r.a,
at that time he was not yet a Muslim.
He was called with his group of people
to see Heraclius.
And when he stands in front of him,
he says, who from amongst you
is the most closest related to this man
who's claiming to be a prophet?
Abu Sufyan says, it's me.
Because obviously he was a Quraish.
The others were not so close
to that clan of Rasulullah s.a.w.
So what happened as a result,
he called him forward and he said, come forward.
He told his men, stand behind him.
We don't want to see the others just now.
They are shy.
I'm going to ask this man questions.
And if he lies,
we don't want to see the reaction of those people.
So immediately Abu Sufyan knew
I need to speak the truth here.
So he asked Abu Sufyan,
this man who's claiming to be a messenger,
what is his lineage?
Does he have a good lineage?
Abu Sufyan says, yes, he has a good lineage.
Obviously, he just said he was a relative.
So it has to be a good lineage.
He says, yes, he has a good lineage.
He says thereafter, he says,
has anyone before him ever said something
similar to what he has said?
Abu Sufyan said, no,
he's the first one who came with it.
Have there been any kings or leaders
from his parents or family?
No.
Thereafter, he says,
have you ever considered him a liar in anything?
Has he lied?
No, he's not a liar.
We never knew him as a liar.
Then he says,
have any of his forefathers uttered words
similar to this?
The answer is no.
Who are the people who follow him?
The wealthy or the influential
or those who do not have much influence?
He said, well,
those who don't have much influence
are the ones who follow him.
Then he says,
are the numbers of his followers
increasing or decreasing?
He says, well, they are increasing.
Then he says,
are people who have accepted his message
ever reneging, coming back
and rejecting the message?
He says, not one of them.
Then he says,
does he ever break his promise
and his treaty when he promises?
He says, no, never.
In fact, right now we are here
because of a treaty we have with him.
That's what he says.
Then he says,
have you ever fought him?
And if you have,
what is the result of the war?
He says, well, we have fought him.
One war he wins, one war we win.
So this man was convinced.
He says, wallahi,
if what you are telling me is true,
then he is the messenger
that we are waiting for.
But I did not expect him
to be from amongst the Arabs.
And wallahi,
if what you are saying is true,
he will very soon rule the piece of land
under my feet.
That's what he says.
Who?
From the Roman Empire, Heraclius.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
grant us an understanding.
In fact, he also asked a question,
what does he command?
What does he instruct?
So Abu Sufyan says,
he instructs us, first thing,
an ta'budu allaha wahdahu laa sharika lah.
laa tushariku billahi shay'an.
To worship Allah alone
without associating partners
with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
If you take a careful look at that answer,
the first thing Abu Sufyan is saying,
the Prophet was worried about shirk.
Nobody must engage in association
of partnership with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
This was Muhammad,
sallallahu alayhi wa sallam.
So up to this day,
the prime message of Islam,
worship Allah alone,
do not associate any partners
with Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
Now, this man says to Abu Sufyan,
you see, I asked you about his lineage,
because the messengers come with a good lineage.
I asked you,
if anyone before him has said anything of this nature,
because perhaps he would just be following them.
I asked you about his forefathers,
because if his forefathers were leaders or kings,
perhaps he just wanted to gain it back.
I asked you if anyone,
I asked you if anyone called him a liar
or if he was a liar.
When you said no,
I knew that if he does not lie about people,
he would never lie about the Almighty.
Subhanallah, simple.
If a man doesn't lie between one another,
why would he lie about Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala?
Then I asked you about his followers,
because all the messengers,
the followers, their followers primarily
are those who are not that influential.
And thereafter, I asked you,
do they increase or decrease?
Because as the Iman increases,
nobody would actually go back
and the numbers would never ever decrease.
And thereafter, I asked you about
whether he breaks promises,
because a messenger does not break a promise.
And I asked you if you fight him,
and who wins?
And all the messengers,
they win and they lose,
but final victory is theirs.
Do you know what happened?
The people around Heraclius
began to make a noise
to the degree that they had to
send Abu Sufyan and them out
and they were discussing amongst themselves
whatever they discussed.
Abu Sufyan later on himself says
that I told my people of Quraysh
at that particular time
that you see this Ibn Abi Kabsha,
that was the name they used to use
for Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wa sallam.
He says, you see even the Roman king
is fearing him.
Look at this,
even the Roman king is fearing him.
And Abu Sufyan says later on
that it was at that point
when I felt in my heart
the first effect of Islam.
See, he didn't accept Islam at that stage,
Abu Sufyan.
But this man Heraclius
who did not accept Islam,
but he had a discussion,
he knew this is right.
So when Heraclius met his leaders
in Himes a little bit later on,
he had a meeting with them,
all his chiefs,
he closed the doors
and he told them look,
there is a messenger,
he gave them the story.
They were so upset,
they all rushed to the door,
they found it locked.
When they got back,
he told them relax,
take it easy.
I'm not telling it to you
because I want to follow him.
I'm telling it to you
to see how seriously you take your faith.
So don't worry,
we're not going to follow him.
Look at this.
After knowing what was right and wrong,
after asking the questions,
he still did not accept.
And this is why we say
and I want to end on this note,
my beloved brothers and sisters,
we know what is right.
We know what we have is right.
We don't have a doubt.
Why is it that we take so long?
We take so long to leave that
which will earn the wrath of Allah,
our bad habits.
We take so long to leave them.
Why is it that we cannot leave sin
for the sake of Allah
when what we have,
we know it is right.
We take so long to respond.
Why is it that we feel lazy
to obey the instruction of Allah?
We couldn't even cover ourselves
to save our lives sometimes.
May Allah safeguard our women.
Sometimes we have a scarf,
a piece of cloth,
which is so small,
which could be the result
of our entry into Jannah
or it could result in our entry into Jannah.
And perhaps we have just flung it
into our wardrobe
and we walk out
in the total wrath of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala.
We take so long to respond.
Come on, shouldn't the hearts
of the Muslims soften up?
We don't want to be like Heraclius
and the others who knew what was right
and what was wrong,
but they rejected it.
May Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us
the surrendering.
Insha'Allah we meet tomorrow
to continue with this,
until then.